2nd ANNUAL CAPITAL CERTAMEN – FEBRUARY 2002
Sponsored by the Maryland Senior Classical League
LEVEL II
ROUND IV

1. What son of Apollo went to the underworld to win back his bride, but lost her a second time at the brink of success?        Orpheus
Bonus A: What Athenian went to the underworld to free his friend who had tried to kidnap Persephone?         Theseus
 Bonus B: Hades sent what wily King of Corinth, the inventor of handcuffs, back to earth to get a
  proper funeral, then found him unwilling to return? Sisyphus

2. From what Latin verb and its meaning do we get the word “commotion? 
Moveo, movere, to move or upset
Bonus A: From what Latin verb and its meaning is the English word “ridiculous” derived? 
Rideo, Ridere, to laugh
Bonus B: From what deponent verb is “progress” derived? Gradior, gradi

3. What is the superlative of latus?    Latissimus
Bonus A: What is the superlative of miser?   Miserrimus
 Bonus B: What is the superlative of magnus?  Maximus

4. Which of the following verbs is not in the same tense as the others? Regimus, ponunt, agetis, mittitis
Agetis
Bonus A: Change agetis to the same tense as the others.  Agitis
Bonus B: Change agitis to the singular.    Agis

5. What emperor of Rome made his horse a senator?   Caligula
 Bonus A: What does Caligula’s name mean?    Little boots
 Bonus B: What Roman emperor regaled his guests on the Isle of Capri and then flung them off
of his mountain into the Bay of Naples?    Tiberius

6. Bellerophon is to the Chimera as ____ is to the Nemean lion.  Hercules
Bonus A: Which of Hercules’ 12 labors was the killing of the Nemean lion? The First
 Bonus B: What did Hercules do with the lion’s skin?    He wore it

7. The first territory occupied and governed by the Romans was the plain lying south of the Tiber. What is the name for this area, which gives us the term “Latin”?  Latium
Bonus A: Who was the “mythical” King of Latium when Aeneas arrived there? King Latinus
 Bonus B: What was the name of his wife?      Queen Amata

8. What were the largest and most famous baths in Rome? Baths of Caracalla
Bonus A: In Roman baths, what was the cold room called? Frigidarium
 Bonus B: What was the hot room called?   Caldarium

9. Give the four principal parts of the root verb that gives us the derivative “procession”.
(pro)cedo, (pro)cedere, (pro)cessi, (pro)cessus
 Bonus A: Give the four principal parts of the root verb that gives us the derivative “capture.” 
capio, capere, cepi, captus
Bonus B: Give the four principal parts of the root verb that gives us the derivative “inspection.”
specto, spectare, spectavi, spectatus
10. What famous Roman orator prosecuted Catiline and was exiled?   Cicero
Bonus A: What famous Roman traitor spared Rome at the request of his mother? Coriolanus
 Bonus B: What famous Roman builder of  aqueducts was blind?   Appius Claudius

11. What was Rhea Silvia’s occupation at the time of her sons’ conception?  Vestal Virgin
Bonus A: Who was Rhea Silvia’s father?     Numitor
 Bonus B: What evil brother of Numitor had usurped the throne?  Amulius

12. Pono is to posui as curro is to?  Cucurri
Bonus A: Vidi is to videre as potui is to? Posse
 Bonus B: Audit is to audiunt as est is to? Sunt

13. What Roman temple literally means, “dedicated to all gods”? Pantheon
Bonus A: What was the Latin name of the circle at the top of the dome through which light was allowed to enter?        Oculus
 Bonus B: Where in ancient Rome was the Pantheon located? Campus Martius

14. Give in the ablative singular, “serious wound.”  gravi vulnere
Bonus A: Make it genitive plural.    gravium vulnerum
 Bonus B: Make gravi vulnere accusative plural.  gravia vulnera

15. What two mythological monsters do you think of when someone says, “Cautght between a rock and a hard place”?         Scylla & Charybdis
Bonus (A&B): Describe Scylla and Charybdis, for 5 points each. Scylla: woman with 6 dog heads around waist, Charybdis: whirlpool

16. Who of the following does not belong: puella, serva, nauta, femina?  Nauta
Bonus A: Give the ablative plural for: good girls.    Puellis bonis
 Bonus B: Give the accusative plural for: the small sailors.   Nautas parvos

17. In Republican Rome, books were made of scrolls made from what material?  Papyrus (reeds)
Bonus A: Romans wrote with a penna, a quill. What would we call a penna? A feather
 Bonus B: School children often wrote on a wax tablet, what was it called?  Tabella

18. Which of the following forms can’t be a relative pronoun: cuius, quae, qui, quid?  Quid
Bonus A: Which of the following can’t be a reflexive pronoun: mei, nos, tu, vobis? Tu
Bonus B: What type of pronoun is used in this sentence: “This man is here.” demonstrative

19. What hunter, beloved by Venus, was killed by a boar after failing to heed her advice? Adonis
Bonus A: What flower sprang from the blood of Adonis?  Anemone
Bonus B: What other of Venus’ mortal lovers was struck by Jupiter with a thunderbolt for having bragged of their affair?      Anchises

20. In the sentence, “It will be a test of his economic program,” translate “his.” Eius/huius/illius
Bonus A: In the sentence, “Caesar divorced his wife Pompeia,” translate “his.” Suam
Bonus B: In the sentence, “For he’s a jolly good fellow,” translate “he’s.”   Est
