2nd ANNUAL CAPITAL CERTAMEN – FEBRUARY 2002
Sponsored by the Maryland Senior Classical League
LEVEL III & IV
ROUND I

1.   What English word derives from the Latin word that means “things that must be done”? agenda
“Agenda” is just one of many future passive participles that have come to English unchanged. For your bonus, give these English words that are Latin future passive participles.
 a. “something that must be brought back (to the people)” referendum
 b. “something that must be remembered”   memorandum

2.    What was Dido’s dead husband’s name?   Sychaeus 
a. When Dido finally dies in the Aeneid, whom does Juno send to take a lock of her hair as an offering in the underworld?      Iris
b. Who was Dido’s evil brother?    Pygmalion

3.   Translate “leader” in the following sentence: He knew that the leader would come to Rome. Ducem
a. From the same sentence, translate “would come.”  Venturum esse
 b. Make “venturum esse”  a perfect infinitive.  Venisse

4.   Give the Latin comparative adjective and meaning from which the English word “ameliorate” comes.          Melior – better
 a. What is the comparative of “malus?”   peior
b. Make “peior” superlative.     Pessimus

5.    What woman with powers of sorcery helped Jason obtain the Golden Fleece? Medea
a. What Trojan woman had the power of prophecy?    Cassandra
 b. What Greek king killed his father while trying to avoid a prophecy that said he’d do just that?             Oedipus

6.   Use an ablative absolute to translate the subordinate clause in this sentence:
      “After dinner was prepared, everyone sat down to eat.”  Cena parata
 For your bonus, translate the subordinate clauses in the following sentences as ablative absolutes.
 a. When Augustus was leader, Rome thrived.  Augusto duce
b. If peace is made, all nations will rejoice.   Pace facta

7.   What figurative device is evident in the first 3 words of the Aeneid? Metonymy
a. – b. What two poetic devices are used in the phrase: “magno cum murmure montis?”    Alliteration, Onomatopoeia, Personification

8.   What lyric meter has each line consist of eleven syllables? Hendecasyllabic
 a. What poet wrote this line of hendecasyllabic? “Vivamus mea Lesbia atque amemus.”  Catullus
 b. What Greek poet was Catullus honoring by naming his lover Lesbia?    Sappho

9.   What Roman orator was considered the best advocate of all? Cicero
a. His most famous oration was against which conspirator? Catiline
b. What rhetorical device is illustrated by his famous words: “O tempora, O mores!” apostrophe

10.  What ablative is illustrated in this sentence? “Miles erat fortior ullo homine.”  Abl. of Comparison
Name the uses of ablative in the following sentences:
 a. Caesar vir humili genere erat.      Abl. of Description
b. Captivus gladio interfectus est.      Abl. of Means

11.  What case would “we” be in this sentence?  We had to do the work.  Dative
a. Say in Latin: It had to be seen.      Videndum erat
b. Translate “working” in this sentence:  We did it by working hard.   Laborando

12.  Who took Aeneas to the underworld?    Sibyl 
a. Who was Aeneas’ faithful companion?   Achates
 b. Whom did Aeneas have to defeat in Latium?  Turnus

13.  What Shakespearean tragedy would the Romans have called “Labor amoris amissus?” Love’s Labor Lost
a. What classic would this be? “ Fortis novus orbis terrarum”  Brave New World
 b. How about this one? “Murum et hominum”     Of Mice and Men

14.   Give the genitive singular endings from 1st through 5th declension.    Ae, i, is, us, ei
a. Now give the ablative singular endings.    a, o, e, u, e
b. Now give the genitive plural endings.    Arum, orum, um, uum, erum

15.  What mythological father and son were the first to fly?   Daedalus and Icarus
 a. What famous winged horse flew?     Pegasus
 b. What son of Apollo took his father’s chariot and flew too high? Phaethon

16.  What Roman holiday was similar to our Christmas?   Saturnalia
 a. To what deity was the holiday of Lupercalia dedicated?  Faunus
 b. What happened to some slaves during Saturnalia?   
They could exchange roles with their masters / they could become free temporarily

17.  What use of the subjunctive is illustrated in this sentence?
 Miratus est quid puellae in casa agerent. Indirect Question
a. Translate the above sentence.       He wondered what the girls were doing in the house.
b. Make “agerent” pluperfect.  Egissent

18.  What do the verbs obliviscor and memini have in common?    Both take the genitive case
 a. What else is special about “obliviscor?”     It is a deponent verb
 b. Give 3 deponent verbs that take the ablative case.  Utor, fruor, fungor, potior, vescor (take any 3)

19.  Where would you be if you were floating down the river Phlegethon?     The underworld
 a. What was the river of forgetfulness in Hades?     Lethe
 b. What river were souls who had not received proper burial forbidden to cross?  Styx

20.  This round is over, but don’t shout for joy! Say in Latin “Don’t shout.”  Noli clamare/Nolite clamare
 a. Say in Latin “Come, my son.”       Veni, mi fili.
b. What command in Latin is the first person sg. personal  pronoun in English?   i
