2nd ANNUAL CAPITAL CERTAMEN – FEBRUARY 2002
Sponsored by the Maryland Senior Classical League
LEVEL II
ROUND I

1.   What were the 3 periods of Roman government?   Monarchy, Republic, Empire
a. Who were the first and last kings of Rome? Romulus, Tarquinius Superbus
b. Who was the first emperor of Rome? Augustus

2.   Today, you must answer the certamen questions carefully. Using an ablative of manner, say “carefully.”          Cum cura
 a. What is the top honor for a college graduate?  Summa cum laude
b. What is the Latin phrase for a graduate’s school?  Alma mater

3.   Juppiter was well-known for his many affairs. What woman did Jupiter turn into a cow to protect her from his jealous wife?       Io
a. Whom did Juno send to watch over Io?   Argus
 b. What god was sent to kill Argus?    Mercury

4.   What Britney Spears song would the Romans have called: “Heu, iterum id feci?” Oops, I did it again
a. What about Destiny’s Child’s song: “Dic meum nomen.” Say my name
 b.  What Bob Marley song was: “Nulla femina, noli flere.”  No woman, no cry

5.   What modern country did the Romans call “Helvetia?”  Switzerland
a. What was the Roman name for France?   Gallia
 b. How about Spain?      Hispania

6.   Translate the relative pronoun in this sentence. Those were the boys whose team won.  Quorum
 a. Translate the relative in this sentence:  Here is the girl whom you indicated.  Quam
 b. Translate the relative in this sentence: Where are the men to whom you gave food? Quibus

7.   “One hand washes the other.” What is the simple Latin phrase that translates this English cliché?             Quid pro quo
a. What is the Latin expression that urges us to “seize the moment?” Carpe diem
b. What Roman poet coined the phrase “Carpe diem?”   Horace 
8.   Put the participle in the following sentence into Latin: Walking down the street, I noticed all the flowers.            Ambulans
a. Do the same for the participle in this sentence: He was about to walk down the street. Ambulaturus
b. Do the same for the participle in this sentence: I opened the letter sent by my father. Missas

9.   What country was Rome’s enemy in the 3 Punic wars?     Carthage
a. What famous queen of Carthage loved Aeneas?     Dido
b. What famous Carthaginian almost defeated Rome in the second Punic War? Hannibal

10.  Prince Georges County’s motto is “semper eadem.” What does this motto mean? Always the same
a. Translate the demonstrative in this sentence:  I asked him not to do that.   Illud
b. Translate the demonstrative in this sentence: Puer haec dixit.   These things

11.  Give the 3rd pl. fut. act ind. of the verb “to hear.”  Audient
a. Make “audient” perfect active.   Audiverunt
b. Make “audiverunt” passive.   Auditi sunt

12.  What does it mean if a task is “Herculean?”  It is very difficult
a. What hero sought the golden fleece?  Jason
b. What hero killed Medusa?    Perseus

13.  What famous Roman prisoner led a slave revolt as a result of being forced to be a gladiator and fight friends?   Spartacus
a. What word was branded onto a runaway slave’s forehead when he was found?    Fugitivus
b. What was the name of Cicero’s slave who created the first system of shorthand? Tiro

14.  What present passive infinitive is also the English for “a young horse?”  poni
a. Give the perfect active infinitive of “poni.”    Posuisse
b. Give the perfect passive infinitive of “posuisse.”    Positus esse

15.  Give the ablative singular of “brave soldier.”  Forti milite
a. Put “forti milite” into the genitive plural.  Fortium militum
b. Put “fortium militum into the nominative sg.  fortis miles

16.  If your doctor wrote a prescription that told you to take your medicine “hora somni,” when should you take it?   At bedtime

a. If your prescription read “b.i.d.,” how often should you take it?  Twice a day
b. When would you take it if it read “a.c.?”    before eating

17.  Give the month, day and year of the death of Julius Caesar.   March 15, 44 BC
a. Give the month, day and year of the founding of Rome.  April 21, 753 BC
b. In what year did Mt. Vesuvius erupt?             79 AD

18.  What was the name of the slave who led Roman boys to school?  Paedagogus
a. Say in Latin: He is running to school.   Currit ad ludum.
b. What language did students learn besides Latin?  Greek

19.  When recognized, obey this command: Dic mihi nomen tuum.  Student’s name
a. Omnes, cantate in Anglice “mica, mica, parva stella.”  All sing “Twinkle, twinkle, little star”
b. Omnes, iungete vestros manus.    All join hands.

20.   What was the name of the Cyclops whose eye Ulysses pierced? Polyphemus
a. What sorceress turned Ulysses men into animals?   Circe
b. Who was Ulysses” son?      Telemachus
